A RANK BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO VI

This page describes a few vi commands that can be used to accomplish
simple editing tasks.  Full documentation for vi can be found in The
UNIX User's Manual Supplementary Documents, chapter 15 (really advanced
users should read chapter 16 as well).  Two things to keep in mind:
First, the editor is pronounced "vee eye;" if you pronounce it "vie,"
UNIX gurus will laugh at you, though not out loud.  Second, vi is
case-sensitive; be sure to use upper or lower case commands as
appropriate.

MODES
Vi is a modal editor; what you can do depends on what mode you are in.
The two modes of interest to us are command mode and insert mode.  You
type most commands in command mode; all you do in insert mode is type
your text.  You get out of insert mode by pressing the "escape" key,
usually marked "esc" on keyboards; on some keyboards, you may have to
hold down the "control" or "alt" key and press "[".  If you press the
"escape" key in command mode, vi will beep at you; so if you get
confused, just press "escape" until vi beeps; then you'll be back in
command mode.

MOVING AROUND
Here are some motion commands in vi.  They are typed in command mode.
When motion commands are used, the editor remains in command mode.

  COMMAND      WHAT IT DOES
  control-h    Moves the cursor left one character.
  h            Moves the cursor left one character.
  j            Moves the cursor down one line.
  k            Moves the cursor up one line.
  l            Moves the cursor right one character.
  w            Moves the cursor forward to the beginning of the
               next word.
  b            Moves the cursor backward to the beginning of the
               previous word.

DELETING TEXT
Here are some commands to get rid of text.  Type them in command mode.
When the following deletion commands are used, the editor remains in
command mode.

  COMMAND      WHAT IT DOES

  dd           Deletes the current line.
  x            Deletes the character at the cursor and moves the
               rest of the line to fill the hole.

ADDING TEXT
All of the following commands put vi into insert mode and let you type
text.  Press the "escape" key when you are finished adding text, and vi
will be returned to command mode.

  COMMAND      WHAT IT DOES
  i            Starts inserting characters immediately before the
               current cursor location.
  a            Starts inserting characters immediately after the
               current cursor location.
  O            Creates a new line above the cursor and starts
               inserting at the beginning of that line.  Note that
               this command is a capital "O".

LEAVING VI
The following commands exit vi.  They work in command mode.

  COMMAND      WHAT IT DOES
  ZZ           Exits vi and saves the changes you have made.
               Those are capital "Z"s!
  :q!<cr>      Exits vi, but doesn't save changes (the "<cr>"
               means press the "return" key).
